Add Solving problems with Quarkus extensions (1/n) (#1399)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2022-04-20-solving-issues-with-extensions.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Solving issues with Quarkus extensions (1/n)'
date: 2022-04-20
tags: extensions development-tips
synopsis: 'The unique build infrastructure of Quarkus allows you to solve complex issues in a very simple way by developing custom extensions.'
author: gsmet
---

This is the first post of what I hope will be a series of several articles showing how you can solve complex issues by leveraging the unique Quarkus build infrastructure and extension framework.

> First things first, developing a Quarkus extension is easy: in one command, you can get it scaffolded and get started on the actual implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First things first, bootstraping a Quarkus extension is easy: in one command, you can get it scaffolded and get started on the actual implementation.
```

But that's not the subject of this post!

An extension, apart from providing some runtime code to your application, also allows to tweak the build of your application and do all sorts of things at the build level.
This is what we will focus on in this series.

> Problem of the day: to ensure binary compatibility, the Hub4j GitHub API introduces some bridge methods that confuse Mockito and more specifically ByteBuddy and ultimately make our tests unreliable. How can we solve that?

== Some context

You might have heard about https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-github-app[my Quarkus GitHub App extension]

> that allows you to develop GitHub Apps based on Quarkus at the light of speed with very little boilerplate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that allows you to develop GitHub Apps based on Quarkus at light speed with very little boilerplate
```

    @WithBridgeMethods(value = GHUser.class)
    public GHMyself getMyself() throws IOException {
        client.requireCredential();
        return setMyself();
    }
----

Historically, it used to return a `GHUser` but, in newer versions, it returns a `GHMyself`,
which broke the binary compatibility.

To restore it and with the help of the `@WithBridgeMethods` annotation, the GitHub API build will create two methods in the bytecode:
one returning `GHMyself` and one returning `GHUser`.
This is very useful if you have compiled your application with an old version of the GitHub API and you just want to use the new version without recompiling your application.
Typically, in the case of Jenkins, you can drop a new version of the GitHub API without having to recompile all the Jenkins plugins using GitHub API.

At the bytecode level, you end up with something equivalent to the following:

[source,java]
----
    public GHMyself getMyself() throws IOException {
        client.requireCredential();
        return setMyself();
    }

    public GHUser getMyself() throws IOException {
        return getMyself(); <1>
    }
----
<1> `invokevirtual` of `getMyself()` that returns `GHMyself`

> And if your existing compiled code was calling `GHUser getMyself()`, it will still work after the change of return type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And if your existing compiled code calls `GHUser getMyself()`, it will still work after the change of return type.
```

> All in all, we can relate to the why and it's not that big of a deal as it's fully transparent...

Reviewer: > we can relate to the why

not sure what you mean here

Author: I reworded the sentence.

except when you start using Mockito due to https://github.com/raphw/byte-buddy/issues/1162[a ByteBuddy issue]:
ByteBuddy can get confused if there are several methods with the same signature but different return types.

[NOTE]
====

> ByteBuddy is an amazing library and do not see this post as a critic of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ByteBuddy is an amazing library and this blog post should not be seen as a critique of ByteBuddy.
```

This is an extreme corner case that doesn't happen with standard bytecode.
====

This issue was causing our tests to be unreliable because sometimes ByteBuddy was choosing the wrong method to apply Mockito magic.

== How can we work around this?

In the Quarkus GitHub App case, we don't really care about binary compatibility:
when upgrading to a new version of the GitHub API,
users will rebuild their application.

So given these bridge methods are problematic,
one solution would be to get rid of them.

Obviously, we could fork the GitHub API and avoid generating the bridge methods.

But forking and maintaining a fork forever is definitely not something we should consider if we can avoid it.
Especially since we want to continue benefiting from all the future improvements of the GitHub API.

> So could we somehow keep the library standard but have Quarkus adjust the bytecode when building the application?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So how could we somehow keep the library standard but have Quarkus adjust the bytecode when building the application?
```

Author: I kept this one as is as I answer "yes" to the question just the line below :).

    index.getAnnotations(DotName.createSimple(WithBridgeMethods.class.getName));
----

Unfortunately, `@WithBridgeMethods` has a `CLASS` retention policy
- which makes perfect sense for its usage -
and Jandex only considers annotations with a `RUNTIME` retention policy.

So, in this very case, we cannot use Jandex.

Unfortunately, we don't have many options here:
we have to list the methods manually.

For more flexibility, we introduced a `BuildItem`:

[source,java,role=nowrap]
----
public final class GitHubApiClassWithBridgeMethodsBuildItem extends MultiBuildItem {

    private final String className;
    private final Set<String> methodNames;

    GitHubApiClassWithBridgeMethodsBuildItem(String className, String... methodsWithBridges) {
        this.className = className;
        this.methodNames = new HashSet<>(Arrays.asList(methodsWithBridges));
    }

    public String getClassName() {
        return className;
    }

    public Set<String> getMethodsWithBridges() {
        return methodNames;
    }
}
----

And we will produce a `GitHubApiClassWithBridgeMethodsBuildItem` for each class:

[source,java,role=nowrap]
----
// ...

> classesWithBridgeMethods.produce(new GitHubApiClassWithBridgeMethodsBuildItem(

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's not 100% clear to me, but because the WithBridgeMethid is a class retention policy you can't perform reflection from the sources and need to list them manually (performing changes when a new Hub4j version is out)

Author: Yeah I didn't want to go into reflection as it would have been a huge hack anyway. And you would have to list the class anyway if you don't want to go through all of them.

        "org.kohsuke.github.GHPullRequestCommitDetail$Commit", "getAuthor", "getCommitter"));

// ...
----

Once this is done, we are able to consume the `GitHubApiClassWithBridgeMethodsBuildItem` from any Quarkus `@BuildStep`
so this list is generally available to the Quarkus build.

[NOTE]
====

> I won't go into detail on the Quarkus build process but the principle of it is extremely simple:

Reviewer 2: Add a link to the guide explaning about build items

Author: Done, thanks!
